Add appendix section on term disambiguation (#227)
ietf-wg-scitt/draft-ietf-scitt-architecture: draft-ietf-scitt-architecture.md

informative:

  I-D.draft-ietf-cose-merkle-tree-proofs: COMETRE
  I-D.draft-ietf-rats-eat: draft-ietf-rats-eat

>   NIST.SP.1800-19:

Reviewer: Can someone explain to me what an NCCoE implementation guide regarding "Security Practice Guide for VMware Hybrid Cloud Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS) Environments" has to do with SCITT?

```suggestion
```

Author: more detailed answer: because NIST defined "assertion" and "attestation" which are terms that need disambiguation in the context of SCITT.

- Provisional registration?  No
--- back

# Common Terminology Disambiguation

This document has been developed in coordination with the COSE, OAUTH and RATS WG and uses terminology common to these working groups.

This document uses the terms "issuer", and "subject" as described in {{RFC8392}}, however the usage is consistent with the broader interpretation of these terms in both JOSE and COSE, and in particular, the guidance in {{RFC8725}} generally applies the COSE equivalent terms with consistent semantics.

> The terms "verifier" and "relying party" are used interchangeably through the document. While these terms are related to "Verifier" and "Relying Party" as used in {{RFC9334}}, they do not imply the processing of RATS conceptual messages, such as Evidence or Attestation Results that are specific to remote attestation. A SCITT "verifier" and "relying party", as well as an "issuer" of SCITT Statements and a Transparency Services may also take on the role of a RATS "Attester". Correspondingly, all RATS conceptual messages, such as Evidence and Attestation Results, can be the content of SCITT Statements and a SCITT "verifier" can also take on the role of a RATS "Verifier" to, for example, conduct the procedure of Appraisal of Evidence as a part of a SCITT "verifier"'s verification capabilities.

Author: ```suggestion
The terms "verifier" and "relying party" are used interchangeably through the document. While these terms are related to "Verifier" and "Relying Party" as used in {{RFC9334}}, they do not imply the processing of RATS conceptual messages, such as Evidence or Attestation Results that are specific to remote attestation. A SCITT "verifier" and "relying party" and "issuer" of Receipts or Statements might take on the role of a RATS "Attester". Correspondingly, all RATS conceptual messages, such as Evidence and Attestation Results, can be the content of SCITT Statements and a SCITT "verifier" can also take on the role of a RATS "Verifier" to, for example, conduct the procedure of Appraisal of Evidence as a part of a SCITT "verifier"'s verification capabilities.
```

The terms "claim" and "statement" are used throughout this document, where claim is consistent with the usage in {{-draft-ietf-rats-eat}} and {{RFC7523}}, and statement is reserved for any arbitrary bytes, possibly identified with a media type, about which the claims are made.

The term "subject" provides an identifier of the issuer's choosing to refer to a given artifact, and ensures that all associated statements can be attributed to the identifier chosen by the issuer.

> In simpler language, a SCITT statement could be some vendor-specific software bill of materials (SBOM), results from a model checker, static analyzer, or RATS Evidence about the authenticity of an SBOM creation process, where the issuer identifies themselves using the `iss` claim, and the specific software that was analyzed using the `sub` claim.

Author: ```suggestion
In simpler language, a SCITT Statement could be some vendor-specific software bill of materials (SBOM), results from a model checker, static analyzer, or RATS Evidence about the authenticity of an SBOM creation process, where the issuer identifies themselves using the `iss` claim, and the specific software that was analyzed using the `sub` claim.
```

> In {{RFC7523}}, the Authorization Server (AS) verifies Private Key JWT client authentication requests, and issues access tokens to clients configured to use "urn:ietf:params:oauth:client-assertion-type:jwt-bearer". This means the AS initially acts as a "verifier", and then later as an "issuer".

Author: ```suggestion
In {{RFC7523}}, the Authorization Server (AS) verifies Private Key JWT client authentication requests, and issues access tokens to clients configured to use "urn:ietf:params:oauth:client-assertion-type:jwt-bearer". This means the AS initially acts as a "verifier", and then later as an "issuer". This mirrors how Signed Statements are verified before Receipts are issued by a Transparency Service.
```

{{FIPS.201}} defines "assertion" as "A verifiable statement from an IdP to an RP that contains information about an end user".

{{NIST.SP.800-63-3}} defines "assertion" as "A statement from a verifier to an RP that contains information about a subscriber.
Assertions may also contain verified attributes."

This document uses the term Statement to refer to potentially unsecured data and associated claims, and Signed Statement and Receipt to refer to assertions from an Issuer, or the transparency service.

{{NIST.SP.1800-19}} defines "attestation" as "The process of providing a digital signature for a set of measurements securely stored in hardware, and then having the requester validate the signature and the set of measurements."

> NIST guidance "Software Supply Chain Security Guidance EO 14028" uses the definition from {{ISO.17000.2020}}, which states that an "attestation" is "The issue of a statement, based on a decision, that fulfillment of specified requirements has been demonstrated.". In the RATS context, a "NIST attestation" is similar to a RATS "Endorsement". Occasionally, RATS Evidence and RATS Attestation Results or the procedures of creating these conceptual messages itself are referred to as "attestation" or (in cases of the use as a verb) "to attest". The stand-alone use of "attestation" and "to attest" is discouraged outside a well-defined context, such as specification text that highlights the application of terminology, explicitly. Correspondingly, it is often useful for the intended audience to qualify the term "attestation" to avoid confusion and ambiguity.

Author: ```suggestion
NIST guidance "Software Supply Chain Security Guidance EO 14028" uses the definition from {{ISO.17000.2020}}, which states that an "attestation" is "The issue of a statement, based on a decision, that fulfillment of specified requirements has been demonstrated.". In the RATS context, a "NIST attestation" is similar to a RATS "Endorsement". Occasionally, RATS Evidence and RATS Attestation Results or the procedures of creating these conceptual messages are referred to as "attestation" or (in cases of the use as a verb) "to attest". The stand-alone use of "attestation" and "to attest" is discouraged outside a well-defined context, such as specification text that highlights the application of terminology, explicitly. Correspondingly, it is often useful for the intended audience to qualify the term "attestation" to avoid confusion and ambiguity.
```

Author: We've got lots of detail on RATS here, but did we clearly communicate how "attestation" is related to scitt signed statements and receipts?

Perhaps we should say: Issuer issue signed statements, the do not attest them. Transparency services issue receipts, they do not attest them.

Reviewer 2: > Perhaps we should say: Issuer issue/assert signed statements, the do not attest them

"to attest"? Hm... not recommend using that phrasing. Yes, we communicated how RATS conceptual relate to SCITT above. Here we basically say: attestation can be a confusing term, take care using it.

In {{-rats-arch}} and {{-draft-ietf-rats-eat}}, when conveying Digital Letters of Approval (DLOAs), these claims are typically issued by a RATS Verifier, not a RATS attester, whereas Software Manifests (manifests) are issued by the software manufacturer.

Section 6.3.6 and Section 6.3.7 of {{-draft-ietf-rats-eat}} comment on the use of COSE profiles, and uses the term "attester" to refer to the party which chooses a supported signature or encryption algorithm to secure claims (the act of issuance), and uses the term "verifier" to refer to the party which supports all allowed algorithms, and performs the decryption or verification operation (the act of verifying).

Section 1.3.1 of {{-draft-ietf-rats-eat}} describes the relationship between Attesters which "issue Evidence", Verifiers which verify Evidence and "produce Attestation Results" which are consumed by Relying Parties.
The term "verifier policy" is conceptually similar to the term "registration policy".

> {{FIPS.201}} defines "assertion" as "A verifiable statement from an IdP to an RP that contains information about an end user.".

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
{{FIPS.201}} defines "assertion" as "A verifiable statement from an IdP to an RP that contains information about an end user".
```

> {{NIST.SP.800-63-3}} defines "assertion" as "A statement from a verifier to an RP that contains information about a subscriber. Assertions may also contain verified attributes."

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
{{NIST.SP.800-63-3}} defines "assertion" as "A statement from a verifier to an RP that contains information about a subscriber.
Assertions may also contain verified attributes."
```

> This document uses the term statement to refer to potentially unsecured data and associated claims, and Signed Statement and Receipt to refer to assertions from an issuer, or the transparency service.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This document uses the term Statement to refer to potentially unsecured data and associated claims, and Signed Statement and Receipt to refer to assertions from an Issuer, or the transparency service.
```

- Provisional registration?  No
--- back

# Common Terminology Disambiguation

This document has been developed in coordination COSE, OAUTH and RATS and uses terminology common to these working groups.

This document uses the terms "issuer", and "subject" as described in {{RFC8392}}, however the usage is consistent with the broader interpretation of these terms in both JOSE and COSE, and in particular, the guidance in {{RFC8725}} generally applies the COSE equivalent terms with consistent semantics.

> The terms "verifier" and "relying party" are used interchangeably through the document, however the separation of these terms as described in {{RFC9334}} is compatible with the use of these terms in this document.

Reviewer 4: I think, we should write a generic statement on Disambiguation. Otherwise, this list can keep evolving and we never finish the document!

> The terms "verifier" and "relying party" are used interchangeably through the document, however the separation of these terms as described in {{RFC9334}} is compatible with the use of these terms in this document.

Author: >  A SCITT Verifier is not conducting the appraisal of RFC9334 Evidence, I think.

Why not, a SCITT verifier checks signatures and applies registration policy or verifier policy to the resulting claim set... If this is not compatible, what causes the incompatibility?

> The terms "verifier" and "relying party" are used interchangeably through the document, however the separation of these terms as described in {{RFC9334}} is compatible with the use of these terms in this document.

Reviewer 2: A RATS Verifier consumes Evidence from the Issuer (the Attester). A Signed Statement is not Evidence, you can add Evidence to it, if the TS takes on the role of Attester.

> The terms "verifier" and "relying party" are used interchangeably through the document, however the separation of these terms as described in {{RFC9334}} is compatible with the use of these terms in this document.

Reviewer 3: @henkbirkholz can you make a suggestion for a change?

The term "subject" provides an identifier of the issuer's choosing to refer to a given statement, and ensure that all associated claims can be attributed to the identifier chosen by the issuer.

In simpler language, a statement could be some vendor specific software bill of materials, or results from a model checker, or static analyzer, where the issuer might identify themselves using via the `iss` claim, and the specific software that was analyzed via the `sub` claim.

In {{RFC7523}}, the Authorization Server (AS) verifies Private Key JWT client authentication requests, and issues access tokens to clients configured to use "urn:ietf:params:oauth:client-assertion-type:jwt-bearer". This means the AS initially acts as a Verifier, and then later as an Issuer.

In {{-rats-arch}} and {{-draft-ietf-rats-eat}}, when conveying Digital Letters of Approval (DLOAs), these claims are typically issued by a RATS Verifier, not a RATS attester, whereas Software Manifests (manifests) are issued by the software manufacturer.

> Section 6.3.6 and Section 6.3.7 of {{-draft-ietf-rats-eat}} comment on the use of COSE profiles, and uses the term "attester" to refer to the party which chooses a supported signature or encryption algorithm to secure claims (the act of issuance), and uses the term "verifier" to refer to the party which supports all allowed algorithms, and performs the decryption or verification operation (the act of verifying).

Author: Not sure what to do with this comment. resolve it?

> Section 6.3.6 and Section 6.3.7 of {{-draft-ietf-rats-eat}} comment on the use of COSE profiles, and uses the term "attester" to refer to the party which chooses a supported signature or encryption algorithm to secure claims (the act of issuance), and uses the term "verifier" to refer to the party which supports all allowed algorithms, and performs the decryption or verification operation (the act of verifying).

Reviewer 3: @henkbirkholz, I'm resolving per today's discussion. Please re-activate if needed.

> Section 1.3.1 of {{-draft-ietf-rats-eat}} describes the relationship between Attesters which "issue Evidence", Verifiers which verify Evidence and "produce Attestation Results" which are consumed by Relying Parties.

Author: Not sure what to do with this comment... resolve it?

The term "verifier policy" is conceptually similar to the term "registration policy".

{{FIPS.201}} defines "assertion" as "A verifiable statement from an IdP to an RP that contains information about an end user.".

{{NIST.SP.800-63-3}} defines "assertion" as "A statement from a verifier to an RP that contains information about a subscriber.
Assertions may also contain verified attributes."

This document uses the term statement to refer to potentially unsecured data and associated claims, and Signed Statement and Receipt to refer to assertions from an issuer, or the transparency service.

{{NIST.SP.1800-19}} defines "attestation" as "The process of providing a digital signature for a set of measurements securely stored in hardware, and then having the requester validate the signature and the set of measurements."

> NIST guidance "Software Supply Chain Security Guidance EO 14028" uses the definition from {{ISO.17000.2020}}, which states that an attestation is "The issue of a statement, based on a decision, that fulfillment of specified requirements has been demonstrated."

Reviewer 2: And ISO 17000 Attestation is the basis for NIST Attestation (https://www.nist.gov/itl/executive-order-improving-nations-cybersecurity/software-supply-chain-security-guidance-2), which, e.g., conflicts with IETF RFC9334 Evidence or TCG Attestation. There be dragons.

Author: Lets identify them, and explain their conflict, thats the purpose of this section.
